---
title: "Galaxy Cluster Constraints on Extensions of Modified Gravity"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-09-01-MOND
excerpt: ' This work illustrates the use of galaxy cluster observational constraints to reduce the parameter space of
          valid, non-Newtonian gravitational paradigms.'
date: 2024-09-01
venue: 'In Final Review'
paperurl: 'http://eliza-diggins.github.io/files/mond_paper.pdf'
citation: ''
---

<h3> Abstract </h3>
<p>
<i>Context</i>. Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) has successfully matched observations on galaxy scales and made several successful,
a priori unexpected, predictions therein; however, the paradigm fails to match observations on larger scales, specifically in groups
and clusters of galaxies. To rectify these tensions, various branches of MOND theory extensions have emerged; however, many of
these introduce mathematical abstractions or additional free parameters which make these extensions difficult to refute or confirm.
<i>Aims</i>. In this work, two such branches—EMOND and MOND + Dark Matter (DM)—are tested using observational and theoretical
constraints which emerge from galaxy clusters. We use the theoretical framework of these extensions to predict observable deviations
from the ΛCDM paradigm, which could serve as observational tests of these MOND extensions.
Methods. Fits to CHANDRA observations of a collection of galaxy clusters are used to constrain the asymptotic behavior of cluster
temperature profiles in each MOND branch. The assumption of hydrostatic equilibrium implies very tight constraints on MOND
phenomenology and introduces some non-trivial points of failure in both branches.
<i>Results</i>. We demonstrate how the MOND + DM paradigm is constrained by the imposition of hydrostatic equilibrium in galaxy
clusters. We show that these constraints could be tested with upcoming X-ray missions, including XRISM. Furthermore, we illustrate
significant inconsistencies in the EMOND paradigm, which suggest that extension to be non-viable in clusters of galaxies.
<i>Conclusions</i>. Modified gravity theories in the MOND research program continue to produce intriguing results on galaxy scales;
however, classical theories of MOND gravity continue to fail at galaxy cluster scales. The theoretical constraints proposed in this
work serve to further limit the class of viable modifications to MOND which could rectify the research program’s tensions with
observations of galaxy clusters. Furthermore, our findings indicate strong tensions in all of the extended paradigms considered,
suggesting that further theoretical work is necessary to rectify MOND’s failures on the cluster scale.
</p>

[Download paper here](/files/mond_paper.pdf)